>> Richard Feldman: Now, I wanna note that
you can use this assembly, don't worry,
you're not supposed to
be able to read that.
To sort of compare and just give you an
idea of what this overhead looks like in
terms of the hardware.
So here is the C assembly
code that we just saw.
For C++ Hello, World, here's what it is.
It's like, okay, there's a little
bit more, but not a whole lot more.
And then, if you look at
something like Go, it's this.
And also, if you look closely in inside
of what's actually going on in here,
there's a whole bunch of jumps and
stuff like that.
So it's actually jumping to a bunch of
other stuff that's doing even more work.
So really, if you wanted to see
the equivalent of how much actual
hardware instructions are going into
Go's Hello, World versus a C or a C++,
you actually need multiple
more screens of this.
Because it's doing so
much to set up the garbage collector and
the virtual machine and
all that kinda stuff.
So, yeah,
this is where the overhead comes from.
C's performance is not because
it's doing something extra,
it's just because it's doing less,
at least in terms of what it compiles to.
All of these C successor languages that we
talked about in the previous section, like
Rust, Zig, Jai, Odin, Carbon, they're all
trying to be over on this side of things.
They're like, really, compared to C, we
wanna have some more ergonomic features,
but we really,
really wanna minimize the extra overhead.
A lot of these languages were okay
with saying, yeah, as C++ is here,
it's okay if there's a little
bit of extra overhead,
as long as it's not really
noticeable in the benchmarks.
C is absolute minimum, but
they're okay with that as long as
the ergonomics get significantly better.
So that's kind of what you're getting
if you're looking into one of these C
alternatives.
Okay, so, going back to this,
as we've seen,
this generating the absolute minimum
number of hardware instructions,
if anything does benchmark faster than
this implementation of Hello, World.
You compare this to a C++ version or
whatever else, and
you find that somebody else has written
one that that is running faster,
this tells you that your
benchmark is wrong.
Because again, you cannot minimize
the number of instructions the hardware
does anymore,
it literally is unbeatably fast.
Normally that's not something you can say.
Normally you say, well, look, if you
thought this was theoretically faster but
the other one benchmarked faster,
then obviously the other one's faster.
But of course, there's always
the possibility that you messed up
your benchmarks.
This is one of the very rare cases where
you can confidently say, if something else
seems to run faster than this,
that means the benchmark is wrong somehow.
Okay, so to make this a little bit
more ergonomic, sorry, idiomatic,
I did talk about, saying a void here,
meaning main is not returning anything.
It is a little bit more common,
or I guess,
idiomatic to actually have main
return an integer and explicitly
return the exit code that you want the
program to do when it finishes running.
So when you run main,
like 0, just by convention,
0 generally means the program succeeded,
everything went fine.
Non zero generally means
something went wrong, and
then there's not really a ton of
consistency in terms of what the non
zero ones mean in terms of
what they're trying to convey.
In terms of what actually went wrong.
But I mentioned this in large part
because when we get to the exercises,
we're gonna do it in this style,
because the C compiler will actually give
you a warning if you do it in this style.
But for learning purposes,
I wanted to start with that
cuz it's a little bit simpler.
The other thing that we can do to improve
the ergonomics of this is, instead of
using this write function, we can use
a wrapper around write called printf.
And printf, as we will see later,
the main reason that people use it, so
this is print formatted,
the f is for formatted.
Again, normally we would
probably see some camel case or
some snake case [LAUGH] in these names,
but this is C, 1972, they just went print,
just stick an f on the end.
It's the formatted version of print,
really minimizing your teletype ink.
And basically, this just takes the string.
And as previously mentioned, this will
do things like automatically calculating
the length of the string and
automatically writing to standard out.
So you don't have to say one for standard
out and 13 for the length of the string,
printf will just take care of that for
you.
Also, as we will see later in the course,
printf has additional features that
let you do some basic string
interpolation type things.
So if you wanted to like print a string
in the middle of this without having
to concatenate it together ahead of time,
printf also lets you do that.
You can also print numbers in here and
it'll convert them to strings for you,
things like that.
So we're gonna use printf quite a bit
more throughout the course of the course.
But in terms of getting as close
to the middle as possible,
printf is just a convenience
wrapper around write.
Instead of coming from unisted,
it comes from stdio, which is for
standard input output.
So usually, when you see a C Hello World
example, they will show you this.
This is almost exactly what you
will see for C Hello World.
It's like, int main, return 0, printf.
But I did wanna go over,
this is the actual closest to the metal
version you can get without getting
into operating system land.
Okay, yeah, the F is for formatted, and
formatted meaning, it supports the things
like, if you wanna interpolate a string in
there or a number or something like that.
So here's an example of using
that interpolation feature,
the actual formatted part.
So we can define a local variable here,
say, int num = 42.
So as with our main function declaration,
we are defining a local variable
here by first saying the type, and
then saying the name of the thing, and
then equals, and then the actual value.
Worth noting that main is a special name.
So you can name your
functions whatever you want.
You can write, of course,
in the course of this course,
we're gonna write helper functions and
stuff like that.
But if you specifically name it, M-A-I-N,
that is special in the C compiler world.
That is basically
the function that C looks for
as the entry point for your program.
So this is what's gonna run
when your program runs.
Obviously, in Node.js or something
like that, you don't need to do this,
you can just start writing your code.
It's fine, but
that's not the way it's done in C.
In C, you actually have to wrap
it in a function named main.
All the other functions can be named
whatever you want, but main is special.
So, int num = 42.
And then, basically,
in order to substitute num into here,
where we wanna say the number is
followed by the actual number,
printf takes multiple
arguments if you want.
So you can just keep giving it as
many different arguments as you want.
That's one of the things that C supports.
It's called var args, for
varying number of args.
And essentially, what you do here is
you use a format specifier to say,
here is the type of the thing that
I want to interpolate in here.
So %d, d basically means digit, or digits.
So it's essentially like, yeah,
give me an integer over here and
I will print its digits out.
As we will see, there are different
format specifiers for different types.
So %s is if you gave it a string.
So this is not quite as convenient as
usual, like dollar sign, curly braces,
string interpolation style.
But again, 1972.
So, we mentioned this a little bit
earlier, but why is it called print?
And why is there no underscore before f?
And again, it's because PDP-11 teletypes.
It was physically printing back when
C was originally created in 1972.
All right, so, let's sort of summarize
all the things we talked about in part 1.
So this is Hello, World in C.
We start off by just talking
about the lowest level,
closest to the metal version
of that that you can get.
What does the actual hardware see?
And we went through the assembly
language of the actual instructions that
the the CPU would be seeing.
We talked about the performance
implications of this,
namely that it is unbeatable fast.
You cannot write a Hello,
World that runs faster than this,
because we were executing the minimal
number of instructions that we could
possibly do on the hardware.
And then finally, we talked about
some ways to very slightly improve
the ergonomics,
like using printf instead of write.
So we don't have to specify the standard
out integer and the length of the string.
And then also,
being a little bit more idiomatic with
using a return like int rather than void.